Add Sass Compiler blog (#688)
oddbird/oddleventy: content/blog/2024/sass-compiler.md

  but it doesn't have to be anymore.
---

Vite comes with built in support for Sass, as well as other CSS preprocessors.
Just `npm install sass`, import a `.scss` file, and it works.

However, this came with a catch. For every Sass import, a new instance of Sass
would spin up, compile, and spin down. If you have a single imported Sass entry
point file that imports other Sass files, this isn't a big deal. But if you're
using Vue's [Single File
Components](https://vuejs.org/guide/scaling-up/sfc.html) (SFCs) with
`lang="scss"`, you were spinning
up a new Sass instance for every single SFC.

That can add up.

Earlier this year, OddBird helped Sass add a new [`Compiler` API], that allows you
to reuse a single instance of Sass for multiple compilations. While you can
adopt the new API in your own bespoke Sass compilation setup, we were excited to
see the Vite team add support in version 5.4.0.

[`Compiler` API]: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/classes/compiler/

## How to enable the Sass Compiler API in Vite

1. Update to Vite version 5.4.0 or above.
2. Switch from `sass` to `sass-embedded` by running `npm uninstall sass; npm
   install -D sass-embedded`.

> {% callout 'Wait- what\'s `sass-embedded`?' %}
> 
>   Sass is written in Dart. The `sass` package is transpiled to pure-Javascript,
>   and `sass-embedded` exposes the same API, but around a native Dart executable.
>   In many situations, `sass-embedded` is faster.
> 
> {% endcallout %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% callout 'note', false %}
**Wait -- what's `sass-embedded`?**

Sass is written in Dart. The `sass` package is transpiled to pure-Javascript,
and `sass-embedded` exposes the same API, but around a native Dart executable.
In many situations, `sass-embedded` is faster.
{% endcallout %}
```

3. In your `vite.config.js` file, set `css.preprocessorOptions.scss.api` to `modern-compiler`.

```js
...
css: {
  preprocessorOptions: {
    scss: {
      api: 'modern-compiler',
    }
  }
}
...
```

> Note- if you're using the indented syntax, you'll need to use the `sass` key
> instead of `scss`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% callout %}
If you're using the indented syntax, you'll need to use the `sass` key
instead of `scss`.
{% endcallout %}
```

> 4. Adjust any options from the [`legacy`] API options to the [`modern`] API

Reviewer: Needs links.

   options. In my case, I needed to update the `pkgImporter` to `importers: [new

>    NodePackageImporter()]` and update the import to `sass-embedded`.

Reviewer: Update the import of what?

And you're done. Now your Vite compilation time should be even faster!

## How to enable the Sass Compiler API in Webpack

Webpack's `sass-loader` also has support for the Compiler API.

> 1. Update to Vite version 5.4.0 or above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update to sass-loader version @@@ or above.
```

What version of Webpack or sass-loader is required?

That can add up.

Earlier this year, OddBird helped Sass add a new [`Compiler` API] that allows you
to reuse a single instance of Sass for multiple compilations. While you can
adopt the new API in your own bespoke Sass compilation setup, we were excited to
see the Vite team add support in version 5.4.0.

[`Compiler` API]: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/classes/compiler/

## How to enable the Sass Compiler API in Vite

1. Update to Vite version 5.4.0 or above.
2. Switch from `sass` to `sass-embedded` by running `npm uninstall sass; npm
   install -D sass-embedded`.

{% callout 'note', false %}
**Wait -- what's `sass-embedded`?**

Sass is written in Dart. The `sass` package is transpiled to pure-Javascript,
and `sass-embedded` exposes the same API, but around a native Dart executable.
In many situations, `sass-embedded` is faster.
{% endcallout %}

3. In your `vite.config.js` file, set `css.preprocessorOptions.scss.api` to `modern-compiler`.

```js
...
css: {
  preprocessorOptions: {
    scss: {
      api: 'modern-compiler',
    }
  }
}
...
```

{% callout %}
If you're using the indented syntax, you'll need to use the `sass` key
instead of `scss`.
{% endcallout %}

> 4. Adjust any options from the [`legacy`] API options to the [`modern`] API
>    options. In my case, I needed to update the `pkgImporter` to `importers: [new
>    NodePackageImporter()]` and change the import of `NodePackageImporter` from
> `sass` to `sass-embedded`. [`legacy`]:
> https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/interfaces/legacystringoptions/
> [`modern`]: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/interfaces/stringoptions/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Adjust any options from the [`legacy`] API options to the [`modern`] API
   options. In my case, I needed to update `pkgImporter` to `importers: [new
   NodePackageImporter()]` and change the import of `NodePackageImporter` from
  `sass` to `sass-embedded`.

[`legacy`]: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/interfaces/legacystringoptions/
[`modern`]: https://sass-lang.com/documentation/js-api/interfaces/stringoptions/
```

And you're done. Now your Vite compilation time should be even faster!

## How to enable the Sass Compiler API in Webpack

Webpack's `sass-loader` also has support for the Compiler API.

1. Update to sass-loader version 14.2.0 or above.
2. Switch from `sass` to `sass-embedded` by running `npm uninstall sass; npm
   install -D sass-embedded`.
3. In your `webpack.config.js`, set the `options.api` to `modern-compiler` for
   the `sass-loader` rule.

```js
...
{
  loader: "sass-loader",
  options: {
    api: "modern-compiler",
  },
}
...
```

## Benefits

The benefit here is going to be very project-dependent. Initial tests of our

> codebases had an improvement of `vite build` going from 4.682s to 3.947s.

Reviewer: I profiled GSM, FWIW.

`sass` with `modern`: ~5.9s
`sass` with `modern-compiler`: ~5.8s
`sass-embedded` with `modern-compiler`: ~3.8s
